/*
*
* Project 3 -  a simple program that simulates virtual memory page replacement
* algorithms 
*
* Name : Elom Kwame Worlanyo
* Email : elomworlanyo@wustl.edu 
*
*/


This project mainly deals with 4 memory page replacement algorithms: 

A) Optimum Page Replacement Algorithm
	In the case of a page fault, replaces the page that is farthest away from 
	being referenced.

B) Least Recently Used Page Replacement Algorithm
	In the case of a page fault, replaces the page that is the least recently
	used.

C) First-in-First-out (FIFO) Page Replacement Algorithm
	In the case of a page fault, replaces the oldest page ni the physical 
	memory table.

D) Clock Page Replacement Algorithm
	In the case of a page fault, loops through a circular list of page 
	references, from the location currently being pointed to, and replaces
	the first page with a use bit of 0.

These replacement algorithms are implemented in vmsim, with some helper 
functions located in utility.

vmsim accepts three command-line arguments in the following order:
o (a) the total number of physical memory frames (maximum 100),
o (b) an input filename where a sequence of page references is stored,
o (c) the chosen algorithm (OPT, LRU, FIFO, or CLOCK). 
If vmsim is run with the wrong arguments or no
arguments, it prints out usage instructions and exit.
The format of the input file must be a simple ASCII sequence of integers in
the range 0 to 99 separated by spaces, for example: 51 7 34 0 8 45 21.
vmsim will first read all the memory references from the input file and store
them in a local array. Then, it will play back these references one by one and 
print out for each reference the current allocation state of physical memory 
frames in the following format:

34: [51| 7|34| | ] 

Each page fault is denoted by a character F two spaces to the end of ']'. e.g:

45: [45| 7|34| 0| 8]  F 

After processing all the memory references, vmsim prints the total number of
page faults and the miss rate (page faults divided by number of references).
This is the format of the output:

Miss rate = 237 / 997 = 23.78% 

The percentage is always to 2 decimal places in this implementation.




In addition to vmsim, 2 number generators were also written for the project.
These were:

A)vmgenU
	vmgenU accepts three command-line arguments in the following order: 
		(a) the range of page references (maximum 100)
		(b) the length of the sequence of page references
		(c) the name of the file that will be generated. 
	
	If vmgenU is run with the wrong arguments or no arguments, it prints out 
	usage instructions and exits. 

	Example input:
		>vmgenU 10 200 vmrefs.dat

	vmgenU will then generate a sequence of page references of the desired 
	length containing random page numbers uniformly drawn between 0 and the
	range minus one (i.e., 200 page numbers between 0 and 9 in the example above)
	vmgenU must write this sequence into the file given as input. 

B)vmgenWS
	vmgenWS accepts five command-line arguments in the following order: 
	(a) ws_size:
		the size of the working set
	(b) LB:
		the lower bound on the number of pages to generate in a
		given working set exhibiting locality of reference
	(c) UB:
		the upper bound on the number of pages to generate in a given working 
		set exhibiting locality of reference 
	(d) the range of page references (maximum 100)
	(e) the length of the sequence of page references
	(f) the name of the file that will be generated. 
	
	If vmgenWS is run with the wrong arguments or no arguments, it should print 
	out usage instructions and exit.

	Example input:
		>vmgenWS 5 8 15 25 200 vmrefs.dat

	vmgenWS will then generate a sequence of page references of the desired 
	length containing random page numbers generated as follows:

	1.  generate num_gen – randomly generate a number between 8 (LB) and 15
		(UB).
	2.  generate 5 (ws_size) page reference numbers in range 0 to 25
	3.  randomly generate num_gen of page references from the set of page
		references found in 2 (i.e., if num_gen is 12, we would generate 12 numbers
		from the set of 5 numbers from step 2).
	4. 	repeat steps 1-3 until 200 (num) page references have been generated. 
		vmgenWS must write this sequence into the file given as input.

	



